---
layout: post
title:  "Vectors"
date:   2017-12-30 15:27:00
categories: nzcpl
---

# Vectors

A vector is a straight line which represents direction and magnitude.

The following arrows represent different vector quantities:

 * Single arrowhead: Heading/TAS
 * Double arrowhead: Track/Groundspeed
 * Triple arrowhead: Wind speed/Direction

# Wind Velocity Vector

Wind Velocity (W/V) means the strength of the wind (in knots) **from** a given direction.

 * Direction is given in a three-figure group (eg. 060).
 * Speed is given in a two-figure group (eg. 25).

*Example: wind of 25 knots from the west is 270/25.*

**Magnetic vs. True**

 * When provided for **flight planning** (eg. MetService, or provided by Flight Information Service
   to **pilots in flight**), direction is in **degrees True (&deg;T).**
 * When provided in **take-off and landing reports** by ATC or Flight Service personnel at attended
   airports, direction is in **degrees Magnetic (&deg;M).**
 * Also in **&deg;M** in **weather reports at uncontrolled aerodromes** (eg. UNICOM, Basic Weather
   Reports, etc. - more information in a later section).

# Heading/TAS Vector

 * Heading (HDG) value of a HDG/TAS vector quantity for most VFR purposes is usually referenced
   to **True North**.
 * Direction will be referenced to some scale (eg. a scale printed on a chart).
 * The same applies for Track/Groundspeed vectors (double arrowhead).

# The Triangle of Velocities

 * It's possible to add vectors and arrive at a resultant vector.
 * **We can apply this to the HDG/TAS vector** and the **wind velocity (W/V) vector** to get a
   resultant **track/ground speed (TRK/GS) vector**. This gives us the actual track the aircraft is
   expected to follow over the earth, and its groundspeed.

# Track

 * **Path of the aircraft over the earth's surface.**
 * Can be either &deg;M or &deg;T depending on which is used for the heading. *eg. if the heading is
   in &deg;T and W/V is in &deg;T, then the track is in &deg;T.*
 * For practical flight planning purposes, a flight computer is usually used to obtain track rather
   than adding resultant vectors.

**Track Made Good (TMG)**

In flight, maintaining the calculated heading (correct for wind in the flight planning stage) should
result in maintaining the required track. However, if the actual track (**Track Made Good**) differs
from the track required, a correction needs to be made to return to the track required.

Therefore, 'track' can mean either **Track Required** (to get to the destination), or **TMG** (track
you're actually flying.

# Drift

 * **Angle from the HDG/TAS vector to the TRK/GS vector, called the Drift Angle.**
 * Depends on wind velocity and aircraft speed.
 * Will be high when wind velocity is high or on a large angle from the track.
 * Will be high when TAS is low.
 * **Drift is always measured from HDG to TR.** It is referred to as:
    * **Starboard drift** if the drift is pushing the aircraft to the right (wind from the left).
    * **Port drift** if the drift pushes the aircraft to the left (wind from the right).
 * Correct for drift by pointing in the nose into the direction the wind comes from, called 'applying
   drift correction.'
 * If the correction is accurate, TR and TMG should be the same, otherwise TMG will differ from the
   track required. The difference between these is the **Track Error**.
 * *Note the difference between drift angle (from HDG to TR) and Track Error (from TR to TMG).*

# Wind Components

 * Tailwind identified with a '+', eg. tailwind component of 20kts = TAS +20kts.
 * Headwind identified with a '-', eg. headwind component of 37kts = TAS -37kts.

# Summary of Terminology

 * **Nautical Mile:** distance covered by 1 minute of latitude, measured along a meridian. Equals
   1,852m.
 * **Knot:** 1nm per hour.
 * **IAS:** Indicated Airspeed (shown on the ASI). Important for aerodynamic performance.
 * **CAS:** Calibrated Airspeed, IAS corrected for pressure and instrumentation error.
 * **EAS:** Equivalent airspeed, CAS corrected for compressibility
 * **TAS:** True Airspeed, CAS (or EAS) corrected for non-standard temperature and pressure.
 * **HDG:** Heading - orientation of the aircraft. Either &deg;T or &deg;M.
 * **HDG/TAS:** vector of heading and true airspeed.
 * **Track:**
    * **Flight-planned Track (TR):** planned path of the aircraft over the surface of the earth.
    * **Required Track:** intended track to be flown, referred to when an aircraft has deviated from
      the planned track (TR).
    * **Track Made Good (TMG):** actual track of the aircraft over the ground, either &deg;T or
      &deg;M.
 * **GS:** groundspeed, speed of the aircraft relative to the ground.
 * **TR/GS:** velocity vector of track and groundspeed.
 * **Drift:** angular difference between HDG and TR. Measured **from the HDG to the TR, specified in
   degrees port (left) or starboard (right).**
 * **W/V:** wind velocity - vector containing direction the wind is coming *from* and speed in knots.
 * **Wind Angle:** angle between wind direction and TR.
 * **Wind Correction Angle:** correction angle to allow for drift, to fly a planned or required track.
