---
layout: post
title:  "Speed"
date:   2017-12-30 14:57:00
categories: nzcpl
---

# Airspeed & Groundspeed

 * **Airspeed** is relative to the airmass the aircraft travels through. The airmass can
   be moving or stationary. We'll assume a constant wind velocity for the following explanations.
 * Airspeed will be (fairly) constant based on power settings, **groundspeed** varies with wind
   direction and strength.
 * For example, an aircraft flying level with an airspeed of 100kts and a tailwind of 20kts will
   have a *groundspeed* of 12kts. If it turned 180&deg; it would have a GS of 80kts.

**Summary**

*Airspeed is the speed of an aircraft measured relative to the air mass through which it moves;
groundspeed is the speed of an aircraft measured relative to the ground.*

# Airspeed Indicator

*NB. this is a summary of information detailed in later sections.*

 * ASI measures the **dynamic pressure**, given by the difference between static (static port) and
   total (pitot tube) air pressure. 
 * Said another way, pitot pressure is also called 'total' pressure, and is the sum of dynamic and
   static pressures.
 * Air pressure from the pitot tube expands a diaphragm against pressure from the static port.
   Diaphragm expansion is converted to a **indicated airspeed** on the ASI.
 * ASIs are typically calibrated in knots, but may also be in MPH.

**Corrections to Indicated Airspeed (IAS)**

 * **Instrument Error** - caused by friction, and wear and tear in the instrument. Generally
   negligible (2-3 knots).
 * **Pressure/Position Error** - how accruately the pitot and static ports can sense pressure.
   For example, yawing left or right will degrade intake accuracy.

When indicated airspeed is corrected for instrument and position error, it is called **Calibrated
Airspeed (CAS).** For some aircraft it will be in the *Aircraft Flight Manual*, for others it may
be displayed on a correction card on the instrument panel.

For flight planning, it's generally OK to take IAS and CAS to be the same, unless increased
accuracy is required.

 * **Compressibility Error** - due to the air compressing against the ASI diaphragm to some
   extent when it comes to a rest, resulting in an enlarged expansion. As a result the **ASI
   over-reads.**
    * When CAS has been corrected for compressibility error, you get **Equivalent Airspeed (EAS)**.
    * More applicable for faster aircraft and normally ignored for aircraft at low IAS.

# True Airspeed

 * Dynamic pressure acting on the diaphragm depends on density of air, affected by atmospheric
   pressure and temperature.
 * ASIs are calibrated to **sea level ISA conditions**, which are **1013.25 hPa** (we usually just
   use 1013 hPa), and **+15&deg;C** at sea level.
 * When conditions are different to those, the reading of the ASI is not a true reflection of
   the speed of the aircraft relative to the surrounding airmass.
 * *eg. if 100kts IAS is shown on the ASI but the temperature at sea level is +20&deg;C, then the
   air is less than standard. The aircraft needs to travel faster to capture enough molecules to
   indicate 100kts. TAS is higher than IAS.*
    * Similarly, in a climb or cruising at altitude, air density is lower and therefore TAS is
      higher than IAS.

**Formulaic Relationship between IAS and TAS**

 * **Dynamic Energy = IAS = 1/2 x (air density) x (true airspeed)<sup>2</sup>.**

In simple terms, this means IAS is TAS affected by air density. When air density is reduced, TAS
will need to increase in order to maintain a constant IAS.

**Note: TAS is almost always higher than IAS except in circumstances where high atmospheric
pressure or low temperatures increase density beyond standard sea level values.**

**Note (2): with altitude, more power is required to maintain a given IAS. The same applies to a
lesser degree when in level flight entering less dense air.**

# Summary

 * IAS corrected for instrument and pressure error gives CAS.
 * CAS corrected for non-standard pressure and temperature gives TAS.
 * When dealing with higher airspeeds and altitudes, CAS corrected for compressibility gives
   EAS (Equivalent Airspeed).
 * In VFR navigation, we care about speed over the ground. Therefore, we calculate TAS then
   correct for wind to give us groundspeed.
