---
layout: post
title:  "Radio Navigation Aids (4) - GPS"
date:   2018-03-13 20:39:00
categories: nzcpl
---

# Global Positioning System (GPS)

*NB. refer to volume 9 (Instrument Rating Manual) for a full description.*

GPS is an American version of the **GNSS**, we'll describe GPS below.

# GPS Segments

There are three basic segments:

 * **Space segment:** at least 24 satellites orbiting earth.
 * **Control segment:** monitoring stations, ground antennas, uplinks, master station.
    * Operated by the controlling authority, US DoD.
 * **User segment:** all receivers.

# Operation

 * Each satellite transmits **position and time**.
 * Also sends a separate uniquely coded signal containing the **navigation message** used by the receiver
   to track individual individual satellites for ranging purposes.
 * The code (from above) is known as a **pseudo random code** and can be either a *coarse acquisition*
   or more accurate *precision* code.

**Navigation Message**

Contains information on:

 * Current satellite position.
 * GPS time reference (extremely accurate atomic clock).
 * An 'almanac' used by the receiver to predict satellites in view and their estimated ranges.

Range determination is taken by measuring period between time of transmission and reception of each
satellite's code, and **multiplying by the speed of light** in free space.

 * Establishing current position takes about 6 seconds.
 * Almanac data takes about 13 seconds, and are stored in the receiver's memory and continuously updated
   during operation.

# Fixing Position

 * A signal travelling from a satellite for a given time gives a **range sphere**, a circular disc around
   the satellite.
 * Where the sphere intersects the earth, a curved position line is given.
 * Information available to the GPS receiver places it on this line, but can't establish a fix without
   additional positions.
 * For a position in space, a reciever requires **good signals from at least four satellites.**
    * A minimum of **three satellites provides range information**, the fourth is needed so the less
      accurate receiver clock can be synchronised (or 'trimmed') as nearly as possible to the time being
      used by the satellites.
 * The time for signal to travel from satellite to receiver is very small, but difference between the
   time used by satellites and receiver can result in comparatively large errors, called **clock errors.**
    * Without synchronisation, the position of the aircraft is likely to have a large uncertainty. Trimming
      provides a much more accurate location.

# RAIM

 * Receiver Autonomous Integrity Monitoring
 * When operating, provides a minimum level of navigation accuracy.
 * Minimises a potential error, known as **Position Dilution of Precision (PDOP)**.
    * PDOP: depends on position of satellites relative to the fix - further distance away = greater accuracy
      = smaller error.
 * Analyses signal integrity and relative positions of all satellites in view, and select only the best
   (four or more).
 * **At least five satellites must be in view to have RAIM find an anomolous situation, and six to isolate
   the unacceptable satellite.**
 * When RAIM is lost, GPS unit will display a warning.
 * The **Airways Corporation** provides a RAIM prediction service, available to pilots operating under IFR.

# Geodetic Considerations

 * Geodesy is the branch of mathematics concerned with shape and size of the earth.
 * The **Geodetic Datum for New Zealand** (used for maps/charts, and therefore location of navigation
   beacons, runway ends, aerodrome reference points, etc.) is the **New Zealand Geodetic Datum 1949.**
 * However, **GPS receivers and data banks use the World Geodetic System (WGS) 84**, which has *been
   adopted in NZ in the last few years.*
    * Most charts now show the abbreviation **WGS 84**.

**If GPS is used with older charts which are still based on the NZ Geodetic Datum 1949, significant errors
as much as several hundred metres may be present.**

# Augmentation of GPS

 * GPS has improved, errors as small as **15-18m** for GA are common today.
 * Can be reduced further by *ground based reference stations*.
 * Broadcast the difference between the known position of the satellite stations, and the positions indicated
   by the satellite system.
 * GPS receivers pick up and apply this correction.
 * Two systems that use the ground based reference system are the:
    * **Differential GPS (DGPS)** and **Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS)**.
    * DGPS is used in a number of countries overseas.
    * WAAS is used only in North America.

# GPS Limitations and Errors

 * **Multi-path error:** satellite signals bouncing off earth surface, multiple signals arrive at GPS
   receiver from different direction (and therefore different times).
 * **Ionosphere Propagation Effect:** result from charged particles in the ionosphere interfering with
   propagation speed of satellite signals.
 * **Tropospheric Propagation Effect:** result from water vapour in tropopause slowing down satellite signals.
   Somewhat minimised by compensation modelling in the GPS receiver.
 * **Receiver Error:** due to difficulty in receiver matching precisely the internal pseudo-random code with
   the satellite's.
 * **Interference:** satellite signals are relatively weak and subject to intereference from other sources,
   eg. VHF transmitters, radar, TV and FM stations near the GPS receiver.
    * Mitigation techniques are used, but **if interference is experienced or a loss of RAIM, details should
      be reported to an appropriate ATS unit.**

# Human Factors Considerations

 * **Mode Error:** incorrect mode selection (eg. ENR/TERM/APP etc., or other incorrectly selected functions).
 * **Data Entry Error:** incorrect entry of coordinates, waypoints, etc.
 * **Control Knob/Switch Non-standardisation:** being unfamiliar with your particular GPS receiver controls.
 * **Data Display:** screen size and light conditions.
 * **Position in Cockpit:** must be easily readable, and be aware of parallax errors.
 * Generally essential to cross-check against other sources.
