---
layout: post
title:  "Time"
date:   2018-01-03 07:18:00
categories: nzcpl
---

# Sunrise and Sunset

 * **Sunrise** - precise time the *upper limb* of the sun (first part visible) is on the
   visible horizon.
 * **Sunset** - precise time when the upper limb of the sun (last part visible) disappears
   below the horizon.
 * **Sunlight** - period between sunrise and sunset (NB. not the same as 'daylight').

**Twilight**

 * Twilight is the period of quasi light (or quasi dark) before sunrise and after sunset.
 * **Daylight** is the result of adding morning twilight, *sun*light, and evening twilight.

Therefore, the definition of **daylight**:

**Daylight is the period between the *start* of morning twilight and the *end* of evening
twilight.**

The beginning and end of twilight are specific times:

 * **Morning Civil Twilight (MCT)** occurs when the centre of the sun is 6&deg; below the
   sensible horizon. **VFR operations (day) may not commence before this time.**
 * **Evening Civil Twilight (ECT)** occurs when the centre of the sun is 6&deg; below the
   sensible horizon. **VFR operations (day) must ease by this time.**

# Sensible Horizon**

 * The sensible horizon is a plane tangential to the earth at the observer's location (there's
   a good diagram in the text).
 * The *visible horizon* is slightly curbed due to curvature of the earth and refraction of
   light.
 * The higher you fly, the greater the angular difference between sensible and visible
   horizons, meaning MCT is earlier and ECT later if you're at an elevated site (eg. mountain).

# Duration of Twilight

 * Twilight is shorter in tropical regions (ie. the sun rises faster) than in areas with an
   increase in latitude (the sun rises slower).
 * This is because the sun rises more steeply to the horizon in the tropics, and at a more
   oblique angle at higher latitudes.
 * **Notably: New Zealand twilight is longer in the south and shorter in the north.**
 * *There is another good diagram in the textbook explaining this.*

# Duration of Daylight

Because the earth's axis is tilted relative to the sun, the line delineating sunlight from
darkness doesn't coincide with a meridian. This means locations with the same LMT but at
different latitudes will not necessarily be in the same part of the day (darkness, twilight,
daylight).

This results in the two other factors that determine the beginning and end of daylight:

 * **Seasons** - during summer, **B of MCT (Beginning of Morning Civil Twilight)** is earlier,
   and **E of ECT (End of Evening Civil Twilight)** is later. The opposite is true in winter.
    * These differences are insignificant in equatorial regions (days are about the same
      length year round), and extreme at the poles (24 hours of daylight/darkness).
 * **Latitude** - locations at different latitudes on the *same meridian* may be at different
   stages of the day, depending on whether they fall into the portion of the earth covered
   by the sun or not (good diagram in text).

There is a useful diagram (CPL only) in the textbook, which shows the relationship between
latitude and length of day over the year. The important results for New Zealand are:

 * In summer, days are longer in Southland than Northland.
 * In winter, days are longer in Northland than Southland.

Important not to confuse this with length of civil twilight, which is always longer in the
south (due to angle of the sun rising, always steeper nearer the equater).

# Features Affecting Daylight Conditions

 * **Altitude** - on the surface you may be in darkness at sunset, but an aircraft may still be
   in full daylight.
    * Important because you may be in sunlight when approaching an aerodrome, but descend into
      evening twilight and possibly result in disorientation (especially with fog, cloud cover, etc.)
 * **Atmospheric Conditions** - fog, smog, precipitation, or cloud cover can obscure any available
   light and possibly lead to disorientation.
 * **Obstructions** - a similar reduction in sunlight can result when flying on the eastern side
   of a mountain range (eg. **Canterbury side of the Southern Alps**).

When planning a flight near the end of ECT, it's important to take these factors into account.

# Sunrise, Sunset, and Longitude

 * Places further east always experience sunrise before places further west.
 * For the same reason, sunset will always be later in the day at places further west.
 * Using this, it's possible to calculate time of sunrise or sunset at various longitudes, but at
   similar latitudes.
 * *There are examples to work through in the text.*

# Establishing Beginning and End of Daylight

**AIPNZ Volume 4 GEN 2.7** has Daylight Zones and Tables. These show **beginning and end of
daylight.**

Important notes:

 * Times are in UTC.
 * Upper figure is **beginning of MCT.** Lower figure is **end of ECT.**
 * Flights restricted to 'day only' must operate between the top and bottom times.
 * Interpolate between tabulated values to get ECT and MCT for unlisted locations.
 * Add 12 hours to get NZST, and 13 hours to get NZDT.

# Helpful Tips for Time Calculations

 * Convert all times to the same (eg. NZST, NZDT, or UTC) first, then do the calculation.
 * Remember to convert back to the required time zone.
 * Always include the date in your calculation.
 * **Moving eastward, add time. Moving westward, subtract time.**

# Getting a Time Check

Can get an accurate time check from the following:

 * Air Traffic Service unit.
 * 6 time 'pip's hourly on the National radio programme.
 * From Industrial Research Limited (0900-45678 at time of publication).
