---
layout: post
title:  "Time"
date:   2018-01-02 20:13:00
categories: nzcpl
---

# The Seasons

 * Earth moves around the sun in an *eliptical* orbit.
 * The date when the earth is closest to the sun (Jan 3) is called the *Perihelion*.
 * The date when it's furthest from the sun (July 3) is called the *Aphelion*.

# Day and Time

 * Dates and times are combined into groups. In all cases, the **largest time comes first** (eg.
   year comes before months, before days, etc.).
 * Years and months are expressed as two-figure components, eg. 1804 means April 2018.
 * **Six-figure groups** contain the *date of the month* and *time*. eg. 241630 means 16:30 on the
   24th day of the month.
    * *Take care in six-figure groups with 0000 vs. 2400 in the time portion: 230000 would mean
      midnight at the **start** of the 23rd, but 232400 would mean midnight at the **end** of
      the 23rd -- these aren't the same value.*
 * **Eight-figure groups** contain month, date, and time. eg. 01022013 is Jan 2, 20:13.
 * **Ten-figure groups** contain year, month, date, and time. eg. 201906152204 means June 15,
   2019, at 22:04.
 * Six-figure groups are most common, but others are used (eg. 8-figure groups in NOTAMs).

# Time and Longitude

 * The earth completes one rotation per day, meaning every hour it rotates: 360 / 24 = 15*deg;.
   This means the time of day can be related to the number of degrees the earth has rotated.
    * *eg. if the earth has rotated 30&deg;, we know it has been 2 hours.*
 * The time is the same all along a meridian (ie. doesn't matter if you're north or south on the
   meridian, it will be the same time everywhere).
 * The time at a meridian **west is earlier** and **east is later** than whatever the time at
   the reference meridian is.

**Local Mean Time (LMT)**

Local Mean Time is the time on a selected meridian of longitude. As mentioned earlier, **the
LMT at all points on a meridian is the same.**

# Time Zones

 * The world is divided into time zones, annotated from A to Z, and 0 to -12 and 0 to +12.
    * New Zealand is in the **M (Mike) zone.** Greenwich is in the Z (Zulu) zone.
 * Time zones are normally 15&deg; of longitude (1 hour) apart.

**NZ Standard Time (NZST)**

 * New Zealand uses the **nearby 180&deg; meridian** as a single longitude reference for the time
   zone for the entire country (ie. it's one single time zone).
 * This is called NZST. Because it is the 180&deg; meridian, it is exactly 12 hours ahead of GMT.

**NZ Daylight Time (NZDT)**

 * Daylight saving occurs in New Zealand between the **last Sunday in September** and the **first
   Sunday in April**.
 * Our clocks *advance* 1 hour, meaning we're then *13 hours ahead of GMT.* 

**Coordinated Universal Time (UTC)**

 * UTC and GMT aren't precisely the same thing, but the difference is small enough that we can use
   them interchangeably.
 * To convert between UTC and NZ time:
    * **During NZST**: subtract 12 from NZST to get UTC (add 12 to UTC to get NZST).
    * **During NZDT**: subtract 13 from NZDT to get UTC (add 13 to UTC to get NZDT).

# The International Date-line

 * The international date-line:
    1. Avoids a date inconsistency: imagine starting on the prime meridian at 0900, and travelling
       180&deg; east. LMT is ahead when you travel east, so you'd pass through 0800, 0700, ... until
       you reached the 180&deg; meridian at 2100 on the *day before*. However, if you travel *west*,
       you reach the same meridian at 2100 on the *same day* as you left. This is the inconsistency
       the international date line prevents.
    2. Provides a starting point for each day.
 * The line follows the **180&deg; E/W meridian, except in two locations: one in the northern
   hemisphere and one in the southern** where **geography** requires an adjustment to the line.
 * Travel across the date-line:
    * Eastwards: subtract a day.
    * Westwards: add a day.

# Time and Arc (important)

Time and arc deals with the relationship between differences in longitude and time.

 * Earth rotates 360&deg; in 24 hours, so every hour it rotates 15&deg;.
 * Therefore, every 1&deg; of rotation takes (60 min / 15&deg;) = 4 minutes.
 * And further, every minute, the earth rotates **1 quarter of a degree**.
 * Finally, every *one minute of longitude* (1') takes **four seconds**.

**Important: there is a difference between minutes of *time* and minutes as a subscale of
degrees of rotation.** Recall: 1&deg; = 60' (60 minutes), and 1' = 60" (60 seconds).

**Summary**:

 * 360&deg; = 24 hours
 * 15&deg; = 1 hour
 * 1&deg; = 4 minutes
 * 15' = 1 minute
 * 1' = 4 seconds

*This is an important relationship to understand.* 

**NB.** *there is an example in the textbook on using a drawn line to calculate the difference in
time between timezones using lines of longitude -- it's difficult to recreate here, so reference the
text.*
