---
layout: post
title:  "Radio Navigation Aids (5) - Radar"
date:   2018-03-13 21:19:00
categories: nzcpl
---

# Radar

 * NZ is almost completely covered by *primary* and *secondary* radar.
 * **Primary Radar**
    * Works on the 'echo' principle: signal is sent from ground, hits the aircraft, and scatters in many
      directions. Some are picked up by the radar aerial. Time taken between transmit and receive give distance.
 * **Secondary Radar**
    * Signal from ground-based radar aerial is received by an aircraft's *transponder*, which sends back
      a signal, often encoded with an identifier.
 * Can operate on VHF or UHF. Both rely on *line of sight*. Keep in mind this means flying low near mountains
   will cause issues. Flying higher gives better chance of being picked up.

**Radar Screen**

 * Information from **all radar aerials in NZ is fed into a central computer*, and accessed by radar
   operators from a number of locations.
 * Information displayed on the radar screen varies, depending on factors, eg. transponder equipped or not.
 * Transponder-equppped = transponder code and possible altitude 'painted' adjacent to aircraft position.

# Airborne Equipment

 * Aircraft without transponder can obtain *primary radar services* provide a serviceable radio is
   installed and aircraft is within primary radar coverage.
 * Radar units operate on published frequencies, *but can switch to any other frequency if required.*
 * **Secondary radar coverage is significantly greater than primary.**

**Transponder Modes**

 * Normally have two modes:
    * **Mode A:** 4-digit code set by the pilot.
    * **Mode C:** includes altitude information.
 * Functions are normally:
    * OFF
    * SBY: transponder is on but will not respond to interrogation.
    * ON: respond to Mode A interrogation (code, no altitude).
    * ALT: respond to Mode C interrogation (code and altitude).
 * IDENT flashes the radar symbol on the radar screen.

# Transponder Codes

 * **7500:** hijacking.
 * **7600:** radio communication failure.
 * **7700:** emergency

*"Hi Jack, can't talk right now, I've got an emergency."*

# Radar Services

 * Principal function is to separate aircraft in controlled airspace, and assist aircraft in trouble.
 * In case of emergency, radar services will be provided to VFR pilots. May be in or out of controlled
   airspace.

# Navigation Assistance

 * When requested, can advise tracks to aerodromes or reporting points.
 * Can also advise when significantly off track, or track progress over water.

# Traffic Information

 * May be passed to VFR aircraft about other aircraft. Does not supercede 'see and be seen'.

# Weather Information

 * Radar is not good for seeing weather, but controllers may provide this information when possible.

# Radar Assistance

 * Can be used to get out of dangerous situations (lost above cloud, out after dark, etc.)
 * Do not hesitate to call for radar assistance if this happens.
